# Ten Minutes to Explorer

```elixir
Mix.install([
  {:explorer, "~> 0.4.0"},
  {:kino, "~> 0.7.0"}
])
```

## Introduction

Explorer is a dataframe library for Elixir. A dataframe is a common data structure used in data analysis. It is a two-dimensional table composed of columns and rows similar to a SQL table or a spreadsheet.

Explorer's aim is to provide a simple and powerful API for manipulating dataframes. It takes influences mainly
 from the [`tidyverse`](https://www.tidyverse.org), but if you've used other dataframe libraries like `pandas` you shouldn't have too much trouble working with Explorer.

This document is meant to give you a crash course in using Explorer. More in-depth documentation can be found in the relevant sections of the docs.

We strongly recommend you run this livebook locally so you can see the outputs and play with the inputs!

## Reading and writing data

Data can be read from delimited files (like CSV), NDJSON, Parquet, and the Arrow IPC (feather) format. You can also load in data from a map or keyword list of columns with `Explorer.DataFrame.new/1`.

For CSV, your 'usual suspects' of options are available:

* `delimiter` - A single character used to separate fields within a record. (default: `","`)
* `dtypes` - A keyword list of `[column_name: dtype]`. If a type is not specified for a column, it is imputed from the first 1000 rows. (default: `[]`)
* `header` - Does the file have a header of column names as the first row or not? (default: `true`)
* `max_rows` - Maximum number of lines to read. (default: `nil`)
* `null_character` - The string that should be interpreted as a nil value. (default: `"NA"`)
* `skip_rows` - The number of lines to skip at the beginning of the file. (default: `0`)
* `columns` - A list of column names to keep. If present, only these columns are read into the dataframe. (default: `nil`)

`Explorer` also has multiple example datasets built in, which you can load from the `Explorer.Datasets` module like so:

```elixir
df = Explorer.Datasets.fossil_fuels()
```

You'll notice that the output looks slightly different than many dataframe libraries. `Explorer` takes inspiration on this front from [`glimpse`](https://pillar.r-lib.org/reference/glimpse.html) in R. A benefit to this approach is that you will rarely need to elide columns.

If you'd like to see a table with your data, we've got you covered there too.

```elixir
Explorer.DataFrame.table(df)
```

Writing files is very similar to reading them. The options are a little more limited:

* `header` - Should the column names be written as the first line of the file? (default: `true`)
* `delimiter` - A single character used to separate fields within a record. (default: `","`)

First, let's add some useful aliases:

```elixir
alias Explorer.DataFrame
alias Explorer.Series
```

And then write to a file of your choosing:

```elixir
input = Kino.Input.text("Filename")
```

```elixir
filename = Kino.Input.read(input)
DataFrame.to_csv(df, filename)
```

## Working with Series

`Explorer`, like `Polars`, works up from the concept of a `Series`. In many ways, you can think of a dataframe as a row-aligned map of `Series`. These are like `vectors` in R or `series` in Pandas.

For simplicity, `Explorer` uses the following `Series` `dtypes`:

* `:float` - 64-bit floating point number
* `:integer` - 64-bit signed integer
* `:boolean` - Boolean
* `:string` - UTF-8 encoded binary
* `:date` - Date type that unwraps to `Elixir.Date`
* `:datetime` - DateTime type that unwraps to `Elixir.NaiveDateTime`

`Series` can be constructed from Elixir basic types. For example:

```elixir
s1 = Series.from_list([1, 2, 3])
```

```elixir
s2 = Series.from_list(["a", "b", "c"])
```

```elixir
s3 = Series.from_list([~D[2011-01-01], ~D[1965-01-21]])
```

You'll notice that the `dtype` and size of the `Series` are at the top of the printed value. You can get those programmatically as well.

```elixir
Series.dtype(s3)
```

```elixir
Series.size(s3)
```

And the printed values max out at 50:

```elixir
1..100 |> Enum.to_list() |> Series.from_list()
```

Series are also nullable.

```elixir
s = Series.from_list([1.0, 2.0, nil, nil, 5.0])
```

And you can fill in those missing values using one of the following strategies:

* `:forward` - replace nil with the previous value
* `:backward` - replace nil with the next value
* `:max` - replace nil with the series maximum
* `:min` - replace nil with the series minimum
* `:mean` - replace nil with the series mean

```elixir
Series.fill_missing(s, :forward)
```

In the case of mixed numeric types (i.e. integers and floats), `Series` will downcast to a float:

```elixir
Series.from_list([1, 2.0])
```

In all other cases, `Series` must all be of the same `dtype` or else you'll get an `ArgumentError`.

```elixir
Series.from_list([1, 2, 3, "a"])
```

One of the goals of `Explorer` is *useful error messages*. If you look at the error above, you get:

> Cannot make a series from mismatched types. Type of "a" does not match inferred dtype integer.

Hopefully this makes abundantly clear what's going on.

`Series` also implements the `Access` protocol. You can slice and dice in many ways:

```elixir
s = 1..10 |> Enum.to_list() |> Series.from_list()
```

```elixir
s[1]
```

```elixir
s[-1]
```

```elixir
s[0..4]
```

```elixir
s[[0, 4, 4]]
```

And of course, you can convert back to an Elixir list.

```elixir
Series.to_list(s)
```

`Explorer` supports comparisons.

```elixir
s = 1..11 |> Enum.to_list() |> Series.from_list()
```

```elixir
s1 = 11..1 |> Enum.to_list() |> Series.from_list()
```

```elixir
Series.equal(s, s1)
```

```elixir
Series.equal(s, 5)
```

```elixir
Series.not_equal(s, 10)
```

```elixir
Series.greater_equal(s, 4)
```

And arithmetic.

```elixir
Series.add(s, s1)
```

```elixir
Series.subtract(s, 4)
```

```elixir
Series.multiply(s, s1)
```

Remember those helpful errors? We've tried to add those throughout. So if you try to do arithmetic with mismatching dtypes:

```elixir
s = Series.from_list([1, 2, 3])
s1 = Series.from_list([1.0, 2.0, 3.0])
Series.add(s, s1)
```

Just kidding! Integers and floats will downcast to floats. Let's try again:

```elixir
s = Series.from_list([1, 2, 3])
s1 = Series.from_list(["a", "b", "c"])
Series.add(s, s1)
```

You can flip them around.

```elixir
s = Series.from_list([1, 2, 3, 4])
Series.reverse(s)
```

And sort.

```elixir
1..100 |> Enum.to_list() |> Enum.shuffle() |> Series.from_list() |> Series.sort()
```

Or argsort.

```elixir
s = 1..100 |> Enum.to_list() |> Enum.shuffle() |> Series.from_list()
ids = Series.argsort(s) |> Series.to_list()
```

Which you can pass to `Explorer.Series.slice/2` if you want the sorted values.

```elixir
Series.slice(s, ids)
```

You can calculate cumulative values.

```elixir
s = 1..100 |> Enum.to_list() |> Series.from_list()
Series.cumulative_sum(s)
```

Or rolling ones.

```elixir
Series.window_sum(s, 4)
```

You can count and list unique values.

```elixir
s = Series.from_list(["a", "b", "b", "c", "c", "c"])
Series.distinct(s)
```

```elixir
Series.n_distinct(s)
```

And you can even get a dataframe showing the counts for each distinct value.

```elixir
Series.count(s)
```

## Working with DataFrames

A `DataFrame` is really just a collection of `Series` of the same size. Which is why you can create a `DataFrame` from a `Keyword` list.

```elixir
DataFrame.new(a: [1, 2, 3], b: ["a", "b", "c"])
```

Similarly to `Series`, the `Inspect` implementation prints some info at the top and to the left. At the top we see the shape of the dataframe (rows and columns) and then for each column we see the name, dtype, and first five values. We can see a bit more from that built-in dataset we loaded in earlier.

```elixir
df
```

You will also see grouping information there, but we'll get to that later. You can get the info yourself directly:

```elixir
DataFrame.names(df)
```

```elixir
DataFrame.dtypes(df)
```

```elixir
DataFrame.shape(df)
```

```elixir
{DataFrame.n_rows(df), DataFrame.n_columns(df)}
```

We can grab the head.

```elixir
DataFrame.head(df)
```

Or the tail. Let's get a few more values from the tail.

```elixir
DataFrame.tail(df, 10)
```

### Verbs and macros

In `Explorer`, like in `dplyr`, we have five main verbs to work with dataframes:

* select
* filter
* mutate
* arrange
* summarise

We are going to explore then in this notebook, but first we need to "require"
the `Explorer.DataFrame` module in order to load the macros needed for these verbs.

I want to take the opportunity to create a shorter alias for the `DataFrame` module,
called `DF`:

```elixir
require DataFrame, as: DF
```

From now on we are using the shorter version, `DF`, to refer to the required `Explorer.DataFrame`
module.

### Select

Let's jump right into it. We can select columns pretty simply.

```elixir
DF.select(df, ["year", "country"])
```

But Elixir gives us some superpowers. In R there's [`tidy-select`](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/dplyr_tidy_select.html). I don't think we need that in Elixir. Anywhere in `Explorer` where you need to pass a list of column names, you can also execute a filtering callback on the column names. It's just an anonymous function passed to `df |> DataFrame.names() |> Enum.filter(callback_here)`.

```elixir
DF.select(df, &String.ends_with?(&1, "fuel"))
```

Want all but some columns? `discard/2` performs the opposite of `select/2`.

```elixir
DF.discard(df, &String.ends_with?(&1, "fuel"))
```

### Filter

The next verb we'll look at is `filter`.

This is implemented using a macro, so it's possible to use expressions
like you would if comparing variables in Elixir:

```elixir
DF.filter(df, country == "BRAZIL")
```

Using complex filters is also possible:

```elixir
DF.filter(df, country == "ALGERIA" and year > 2012)
```

You can also write the same filter without the macro, by using the callback version function which is `filter_with/2`:

```elixir
DF.filter_with(df, fn ldf ->
  ldf["country"]
  |> Series.equal("ALGERIA")
  |> Series.and(Series.greater(ldf["year"], 2012))
end)
```

By the way, all the `Explorer.DataFrame` macros have a correspondent function that accepts a callback.
In fact, our macros are implemented using those functions.

The `filter_with/2` function is going to use a virtual representation of the dataframe
that we call a "lazy frame". With lazy frames you can´t access the
series contents, but every operation will be optimized and run only once.

Remember those helpful error messages?

```elixir
DF.filter(df, cuontry == "BRAZIL")
```

### Mutate

A common task in data analysis is to add columns or change existing ones. Mutate is a handy verb.

```elixir
DF.mutate(df, new_column: solid_fuel + cement)
```

Did you catch that? You can pass in new columns as keyword arguments. It also works to transform existing columns.

```elixir
DF.mutate(df,
  gas_fuel: Series.cast(gas_fuel, :float),
  gas_and_liquid_fuel: gas_fuel + liquid_fuel
)
```

`DataFrame.mutate/2` is flexible though. You may not always want to use keyword arguments. Given that column names are `String.t()`, it may make more sense to use a map.

```elixir
DF.mutate(df, %{"gas_fuel" => gas_fuel - 10})
```

`DF.transmute/2`, which is `DF.mutate/2` that only retains the specified columns, is forthcoming.

### Arrange

Sorting the dataframe is pretty straightforward.

```elixir
DF.arrange(df, year)
```

But it comes with some tricks up its sleeve.

```elixir
DF.arrange(df, asc: total, desc: year)
```

As the examples show, `arrange/2` is a macro, and therefore you can use some functions to arrange your dataframe:

```elixir
DF.arrange(df, asc: Series.window_sum(total, 2))
```

Sort operations happen left to right. And keyword list args permit specifying the direction.

### Distinct

Okay, as expected here too. Very straightforward.

```elixir
DF.distinct(df, ["year", "country"])
```

You can specify whether to keep the other columns as well, so the first row of each distinct value is kept:

```elixir
DF.distinct(df, ["country"], keep_all: true)
```

### Rename

Rename can take either a list of new names or a callback that is passed to `Enum.map/2` against the names. You can also use a map or keyword args to rename specific columns.

```elixir
DF.rename(df, year: "year_test")
```

```elixir
DF.rename_with(df, &(&1 <> "_test"))
```

### Dummies

This is fun! We can get dummy variables for unique values.

```elixir
DF.dummies(df, ["year"])
```

```elixir
DF.dummies(df, ["country"])
```

### Sampling

Random samples can give us a percent or a specific number of samples, with or without replacement, and the function is seedable.

```elixir
DF.sample(df, 10)
```

```elixir
DF.sample(df, 0.4)
```

Trying for those helpful error messages again.

```elixir
DF.sample(df, 10000)
```

```elixir
DF.sample(df, 10000, replacement: true)
```

### Pull and slice

Slicing and dicing can be done with the `Access` protocol or with explicit pull/slice/take functions.

```elixir
df["year"]
```

```elixir
DF.pull(df, "year")
```

```elixir
df[["year", "country"]]
```

```elixir
DF.slice(df, [1, 20, 50])
```

Negative offsets work for slice!

```elixir
DF.slice(df, -10, 5)
```

```elixir
DF.slice(df, 10, 5)
```

Slice also works with ranges:

```elixir
DF.slice(df, 12..42)
```

### Pivot

We can `pivot_longer/3` and `pivot_wider/4`. These are inspired by [tidyr](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/articles/pivot.html).

There are some shortcomings in `pivot_wider/4` related to `polars`. The `values_from` column must be a numeric type.

```elixir
DF.pivot_longer(df, ["year", "country"], value_columns: &String.ends_with?(&1, "fuel"))
```

```elixir
DF.pivot_wider(df, "country", "total", id_columns: ["year"])
```

Let's make those names look nicer!

```elixir
tidy_names = fn name ->
  name
  |> String.downcase()
  |> String.replace(~r/\s/, " ")
  |> String.replace(~r/[^A-Za-z\s]/, "")
  |> String.replace(" ", "_")
end

df
|> DF.pivot_wider("country", "total", id_columns: ["year"])
|> DF.rename_with(tidy_names)
```

### Joins

Joining is *fast* and easy. You can specify the columns to join on and how to join. Polars even supports cartesian (cross) joins, so `Explorer` does too.

```elixir
df1 = DF.select(df, ["year", "country", "total"])
df2 = DF.select(df, ["year", "country", "cement"])

DF.join(df1, df2)
```

```elixir
df3 = df |> DF.select(["year", "cement"]) |> DF.slice(0, 500)

DF.join(df1, df3, how: :left)
```

### Grouping

`Explorer` supports *groupby* operations. They're limited based on what's possible in Polars, but they do most of what you need to do.

```elixir
grouped = DF.group_by(df, ["country"])
```

Notice that the `Inspect` call now shows `groups` as well as `rows` and `columns`. You can, of course, get them explicitly.

```elixir
DF.groups(grouped)
```

And you can ungroup explicitly.

```elixir
DF.ungroup(grouped)
```

But what we care about the most is aggregating! Let's see which country has the max `per_capita` value.

```elixir
grouped
|> DF.summarise(max_per_capita: max(per_capita))
|> DF.arrange(desc: max_per_capita)
```

Qatar it is.

You may noticed that we are using `max/1` inside the `summarise` macro. This is possible because we expose all functions from the `Series` module. You can use the following aggregations inside summarise:

* `min/1` - Take the minimum value within the group. See `Explorer.Series.min/1`.
* `max/1` - Take the maximum value within the group. See `Explorer.Series.max/1`.
* `sum/1` - Take the sum of the series within the group. See `Explorer.Series.sum/1`.
* `mean/1` - Take the mean of the series within the group. See `Explorer.Series.mean/1`.
* `median/1` - Take the median of the series within the group. See `Explorer.Series.median/1`.
* `first/1` - Take the first value within the group. See `Explorer.Series.first/1`.
* `last/1` - Take the last value within the group. See `Explorer.Series.last/1`.
* `count/1` - Count the number of rows per group.
* `n_unique/1` - Count the number of unique rows per group.

The API is similar to `mutate`: you can use keyword args or a map and specify aggregations to use.

```elixir
DF.summarise(grouped, min_per_capita: min(per_capita), min_total: min(total))
```

Speaking of `mutate`, it's 'group-aware'. As are `arrange`, `distinct`, and `n_rows`.

```elixir
DF.mutate(grouped, total_window_sum: window_sum(total, 3), rows_in_group: count(country))
```

It's also possible to use aggregations inside other functions:

```elixir
grouped
|> DF.summarise(greater_than_9: greater(max(per_capita), 9.0), per_capita_max: max(per_capita))
|> DataFrame.arrange(desc: per_capita_max)
```

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### That's it!

And not. This is certainly not exhaustive, but I hope it gives you a good idea of what can be done and what the 'flavour' of the API is like. I'd love contributions and issues raised where you find them!
